feat(blog): adding Spark tutorial (#1504)
questdb/questdb.io: blog/2023-04-06-integrate-apache-spark-questdb-time-series-analytics.mdx

well.

What does this mean exactly?

Let's take a look at how data is processed in Spark.

For the purposes of this article, we only need to know that a Spark job consists
of multiple tasks, and each task works on a single data partition. Tasks are
executed parallel in stages, distributed on the cluster. Stages have a
dependency on the previous ones; tasks from different stages cannot run in
parallel.

The schematic diagram below depicts an example job:

![Daigram showing data exported to Spark as jobs](/img/blog/2023-04-06/spark-diagram.png)

In this tutorial, we will import a table from QuestDB to Spark and explore the
inner working of Spark to refine data import. Finally, we will modify and import
the data back to QuestDB.

## Loading data to Spark

First thing first, we need to load time-series data from QuestDB. we will use a
table, `trades`, with just over 1.3 million rows.

The table contains bitcoin trades, spanning over 3 days: not exactly a big data
scenario but good enough to experiment.

The table contains the following columns:

```questdb-sql
CREATE TABLE trades(
  symbol SYMBOL,
  side SYMBOL,
  price DOUBLE,
  amount DOUBLE,

>   timestamp TIMESTAMP

Author: I added L60 as I guess this is why we added CREATE TABLE here. It's confusing because we're not really creating this table. It's already there (with 1.3 million rows). I was confused because I did not see query to insert data into questdb to complete the table.

Reviewer: added a table instead with the column names and types

) timestamp (timestamp) PARTITION BY DAY;

```

The table is partitioned by day, and the `timestamp` column serves as the
designated timestamp.

> The database accepts connections via Postgres wire protocol, so we can use JDBC

Author: ```suggestion
QuestDB accepts connections via Postgres wire protocol, so we can use JDBC
```

Reviewer: i am using "database" instead of "QuestDB" at some places only to avoid repeating "QuestDB" a lot but will commit this. you know this better.

                     "timestamp as ts "
                     "FROM trades WHERE symbol = 'BTC-USD' "
                     "SAMPLE BY 1m ALIGN to CALENDAR) AS fake_table") \
    .option("partitionColumn", "ts") \
    .option("numPartitions", "3") \
    .option("lowerBound", "2023-02-01T00:00:00.000000Z") \
    .option("upperBound", "2023-02-04T00:00:00.000000Z") \
    .load()

df = df.withColumn("partitionId", spark_partition_id())
df.groupBy(df.partitionId) \
    .agg(min(df.ts), max(df.ts), count(df.partitionId)) \
    .show(truncate=False)

```

```shell
+-----------+-------------------+-------------------+------------------+
|partitionId|min(ts)            |max(ts)            |count(partitionId)|
+-----------+-------------------+-------------------+------------------+
|0          |2023-02-01 00:00:00|2023-02-01 23:59:00|1440              |
|1          |2023-02-02 00:00:00|2023-02-02 23:59:00|1440              |
|2          |2023-02-03 00:00:00|2023-02-03 23:59:00|1440              |
+-----------+-------------------+-------------------+------------------+

```

Looking good. Now it seems that we can load any data from QuestDB into Spark. Do
we, really?

### Type mappings

> 

Author: It might be useful to add a line explaining why we're looking at type mapping. For me it is odd that we jump to another new table...

Reviewer: agree, addressing this one

Reviewer: added explanation why we are looking at type mappings

+------------------------------------------------------------------+----------------------------------------------------+
|long256                                                           |bin                                                 |
+------------------------------------------------------------------+----------------------------------------------------+
|0x8ee3c2a42acced0bb0bdb411c82bb01e7e487689228c189d1e865fa0e025973c|[F2 4D 4B F6 18 C2 9A A7 87 C2 D3 19 4A 2C 4B 92 C4]|
+------------------------------------------------------------------+----------------------------------------------------+

+-----+----------+-----------------------+
|g5c  |date      |timestamp              |
+-----+----------+-----------------------+
|q661k|2022-02-01|2022-01-15 00:00:03.234|
+-----+----------+-----------------------+

```

## Writing data back into the database

There is only one thing left: writing data back into QuestDB.

In this example, first, we will load some data from the database and add two new
features:

- 10-minute moving average
- standard deviation, also calculated over the last 10-minute window

> Then we will try to save the modified DataFrame back into the database as a new

Author: Purely because there are too many 'database':

```suggestion
Then we will try to save the modified DataFrame back into QuestDB as a new
```

# do some filtering and print the first 3 rows of the data
df = df.filter(df.symbol == 'BTC-USD').filter(df.side == 'buy')
df.show(3, truncate=False)

```

Believe it or not, this tiny application already reads data from the database
when submitted as a Spark job.

```shell
spark-submit --jars postgresql-42.5.1.jar sparktest.py

```

The job prints the following row count:

```shell
1322570

```

And these are the first 3 rows of the filtered table:

```shell
+-------+----+--------+---------+--------------------------+
|symbol |side|price   |amount   |timestamp                 |
+-------+----+--------+---------+--------------------------+
|BTC-USD|buy |23128.72|6.4065E-4|2023-02-01 00:00:00.141334|
|BTC-USD|buy |23128.33|3.7407E-4|2023-02-01 00:00:01.169344|
|BTC-USD|buy |23128.33|8.1796E-4|2023-02-01 00:00:01.184992|
+-------+----+--------+---------+--------------------------+
only showing top 3 rows

```

Although `sparktest.py` speaks for itself, it is still worth mentioning that
this application has a dependency on the JDBC driver located in
`postgresql-42.5.1.jar`. It cannot run without this dependency; hence it has to
be submitted to Spark together with the application.

> ## Things to consider

Author: ```suggestion
## Optimizing data loading with Spark
```

    .option("partitionColumn", "ts") \
    .option("numPartitions", "3") \
    .option("lowerBound", "2023-02-01T00:00:00.000000Z") \
    .option("upperBound", "2023-02-04T00:00:00.000000Z") \
    .load()

df = df.withColumn("partitionId", spark_partition_id())
df.groupBy(df.partitionId) \
    .agg(min(df.ts), max(df.ts), count(df.partitionId)) \
    .show(truncate=False)

```

```shell
+-----------+-------------------+-------------------+------------------+
|partitionId|min(ts)            |max(ts)            |count(partitionId)|
+-----------+-------------------+-------------------+------------------+
|0          |2023-02-01 00:00:00|2023-02-01 23:59:00|1440              |
|1          |2023-02-02 00:00:00|2023-02-02 23:59:00|1440              |
|2          |2023-02-03 00:00:00|2023-02-03 23:59:00|1440              |
+-----------+-------------------+-------------------+------------------+

```

Looking good. Now it seems that we can load any data from QuestDB into Spark by
passing a SQL query to the DataFrame. Do we, really?

Our `trades` table is limited to three data types only. What about all the other
types you can find in QuestDB?

> We expect that Spark will successfully map a double or a timestamp when queried

Author: From here and through Type mapping:

Is there a special reason why data type formatting is not consistent? Are you referring to the code? E.g.

- geohash, GEOHASH, `GEOHASH`, `Geohash` etc etc.
If there is no specific reason, lower case with monospace, i.e. `string`, would do?

Reviewer: made the namig of types consistent.
QuestDB types are in lower case with monospace, i.e. `string`.
Scala/Java (Spark) types are in camel case with monospace, i.e. `String`.

`WHERE predicate`. With this in mind, the DataFrame is pretty much a query, or
actually more like a query plan.

Most databases come with functionality to display query plans, and Spark has it too!

> Let's check the plan for the above DataFrame we just created.

Author: Adding column

Author: ```suggestion
Most databases come with functionality to display query plans, and Spark has it too!
Let's check the plan for the above DataFrame we just created:
```

```

If the DataFrame knows how to reproduce the data by remembering the execution
plan, it does not need to store actual data at all. This is exactly what we have
seen earlier. Spark desperately tried not to load our data, but this can have

> disadvantages too.

Author: the actual data

Author: ```suggestion
If the DataFrame knows how to reproduce the data by remembering the execution
plan, it does not need to store the actual data. This is precisely what we have
seen earlier. Spark desperately tried not to load our data, but this can have
disadvantages too.
```

```

> Clearly, even few carefully placed `.cache()` calls can improve the overall

Author: I don't have a perfect grammatical explanation for this, but I will try:
'Few' suggests 'not many' and there is an element of negation in it ("not" many); it is usually used to describe an unusual situation. See some [examples](https://dictionary.cambridge.org/dictionary/english/few) under the definition "a small number or not many". 

In this case, either "a few" or "a couple of" would work better.

Reviewer: changed it to "a few"

```

> Clearly, few carefully placed `.cache()` calls can improve the overall performance of

Author: Few indicates a very low number. A few means some - I think you meant a few here?

Author: ```suggestion
Clearly, a few carefully placed `.cache()` calls can improve the overall performance of
```

Reviewer: > Few indicates a very low number. A few means some - I think you meant a few here?

Actually i meant a low number here.
What I am trying to say is that even few cached datasets can make a difference.
Adjusted the wording a bit to reflect this.

the application, sometimes significantly. What else should we take into consideration
when thinking about performance?

> Earlier we talked about partitions. We said that our Spark application consists of

Author: said --> mention

Author: ```suggestion
Earlier, we mentioned that our Spark application consists of
```

```

The fact, that the data is loaded as a single partition, is confirmed. QuestDB stores

> this data in 3 partitions. We should try to fix this.

Author: avoid passive

Author: ```suggestion
The UI helps us confirm that the data is loaded as a single partition. QuestDB stores
this data in 3 partitions. We should try to fix this.
```

```

Depending on the amount of data and the actual query, you might find that
pushing the aggregations to QuestDB is actually faster than completing it in
Spark. Spark definitely has an edge when the dataset is really large.

Now let's try to partition this DataFrame with the options used before with
the option `dbtable`.
Unfortunately we will get an error message:

```shell
Options 'query' and 'partitionColumn' can not be specified together.

```

> However, we can trick Spark just by giving the query an alias

Author: by just

Author: ```suggestion
However, we can trick Spark by just giving the query an alias
```
